# Predicting-Inflation

This is an independent project where I compared SARIMAX and VAR on how accurately they can forecast future inflation rates using previous inflation data and other macroeconomic indicators. I did this project purely as a way to learn more about creating accurate forecasting models with economic data, which is why the majority of this project is exploratory data analysis and playing around with different ways of building models. Please note that each model was created using a fixed training and testing dataset   -- the goal was to find the model with the best long-term accuracy, as opposed to building models that produce rolling forecasts.

For the SARIMAX section, I first tested the stationarity of the dataset and generated an autocorrelation plot. Because it is already stationary, I started fitting an SARIMAX model to the data. This model yielded good forecasts in the short-term, but suffered in the long-term as the algorithm is only working with univariate data. Although the data is already stationary, I was curious to see what would happen when I fitted an ARIMA model to the differenced time series. Given that it's overdifferenced, the predictions were deficient, as expected.

The Linear Regression section was included to show relationships within the data. Furthermore, given that Conditional Least Squares is the main algorithm used to estimate parameter values for prominent time series models such as VAR, I wanted to see how the scikit learn linear regression package, which also uses least squares minimization, produces predictions with other datasets. That being said, linear regression must not be used to make forecasts that can be taken seriously as the i.i.d. assumption for this model is violated with time series data. Moreover, because linear regression is the expected value of our inflation data conditioned upon other correlated factors, you will see that the line simply passes through the "middle" of our inflation data. Given the cyclical nature of our data and its high variance, the linear regression model does as expected and simply passes through the conditional expected values for each time period.

Finally, I fitted a VAR to the multivariate dataset. That being said, I suprisingly found that the inflation data lagged by one and two periods were the best predictors. At first, I hypothesized that utilizing a multivariate dataset would improve my predictions in the short-term and long-term because there was more information. Although there were other slightly good predictors (such as federal funds rate lag 3, which has a p-value of 0.05), I now became curious to evaluate how VAR would compare with SARIMAX on a strictly univariate basis. 

The results: in the short-term, the SARIMAX model performs better. Although the VAR predictions are satisfactory, the predictions (visually speaking) seem to suffer from some bias, meaning we can afford to increase model complexity. That being said, the VAR model performed much, much better in the long-term without any need for updating our dataset. As a result, I conluded that it is better to use SARIMAX when all we need are one period ahead forecasts but VAR (with potentially more complexity) for long-term forecasts when we must produce multiple period ahead forecasts.

I wish to reiterate that this project was mainly done as a learning experience, and these models can be greatly improved on if meant to generate more serious forecasts.
